=MakeExportable

MakeExportable is a Rails gem/plugin to assist in exporting application data in a variety of formats. Filter and limit the data exported using ActiveRecord. Export returned values from instance methods as easily as database columns.


==Supported Formats 

* CSV: Comma-separated values
* TSV: Tab-separated values
* XLS: Excel Spreadsheet
* JSON: JavaScript Object Notation
* XML: Extensible markup language
* HTML: Hypertext markup language
	
	
==Installation
  
* gem - sudo gem install make_exportable
* plugin - script/plugin install git@github.com:novafabrica/make_exportable.git


==Basic Usage

To start using MakeExportable simply add a call to <em>make_exportable</em> in any class you want to use for exporting data.

  class Customer < ActiveRecord::Base
    make_exportable 
  end

To export data you simply call the class method <em>to_export</em> and specify your desired format (see supported formats above).

  Customer.to_export("csv")

You can select the columns you want to return using the :only and :except options.  The default is to export all columns.

  Customer.to_export("csv", :only => [:first_name, :last_name, :email])
  Customer.to_export("csv", :except => [:hashed_password, :salt])
  
You can change the result set by passing in an array of :scopes to call, you can pass in finder options (such as :conditions, :order, :limit, :offset, etc.), or you can call <em>to_export</em> on a class that has already been scoped using named scopes.

  Customer.to_export(:xls, :scopes => ["approved", "sorted"])
  Customer.to_export(:xls, :conditions => {:approved => true}, :order => "first_name ASC", :limit => 50)
  Customer.visible.where(:approved => true).to_export(:xls)

<em>to_export</em> returns an array of the data in the specified format and the corresponding mime-type.  This is done to make sending files easy.

  ["First Name,Last Name,Email\nJohn,Doe,x@x.com\nJoe,Smith,y@y.com\n", "text/csv; charset=utf-8; header=present"]

Then in a controller, you can use the <em>send_data</em> method to send the export as a downloadable file to the user's browser.

  class CustomerController < ApplicationController

    def export
      # Export the data
      options = {:only => [:first_name, :last_name, :city, :country, :email]}
      export_data, data_type = Customer.visible.to_export('csv', options)

      # Send data to user as file
      send_data(export_data, { :type => data_type, :disposition => 'attachment', :filename => "customer_export.csv" })
    end

  end


==Attributes and Methods

MakeExportable doesn't just export attributes that have database columns. It can also export data returned from methods.

  class Customer < ActiveRecord::Base
    make_exportable 
    
    def full_name
      "#{first_name} #{last_name}"
    end
    
    def last_purchase
      last_order = orders.order('created_at ASC').last
      return last_order ? last_order.created_at : ''
    end
  end

  Customer.to_export("csv", :only => [:full_name, :email, :last_purchase])

If you want an attribute to be handled differently whenever it is exported, you can define a method with the syntax <em>#{attribute}_export</em> which will be called when exporting instead of the regular attribute.

  class Customer < ActiveRecord::Base
    make_exportable 

    def visible_export
      visible ? 'Visible' : 'Not Visible'
    end
    
    def updated_at_export
      updated_at.to_s(:long)
    end
  end


==Setting Export Defaults

If you have a general columns, scopes, and conditions you will be calling in multiple methods you can attach them to the <em>make_exportable</em> method as defaults when including it into your class.

* :only and :except - specify columns or methods to export (defaults to all columns)
* :as - specify formats to allow for exporting (defaults to all formats)
* :scopes - specify scopes to be called on the class before exporting

These are defaults which can still be overridden when you perform an export.

  class Customer < ActiveRecord::Base
    make_exportable :as => [:csv, :tsv], :only => [:first_name, :last_name, :email], :scopes => ['visible', 'recent']
  end

  class User < ActiveRecord::Base
    make_exportable :except => [:hashed_password, :salt]
  end


==Magic Methods

MakeExportable also allows you to export to a format using a dynamic name.  Each export format gets two "magic methods".

  <em>to_#{format}_export</em>
  <em>create_#{format}_report</em>

In both cases "format" represents the lowercase abbreviation for the export format (e.g. "to_csv_export", "create_csv_report"). Then the options hash becomes the first argument instead of the second.

  Customer.to_csv_export(:conditions => {:visible => true}, :order => "last_name ASC")
  Customer.visible.to_csv_export(:only => [:username, :email])


==Reports From Other Data

If you just have some data you want to export in the right format, MakeExportable exposes the <em>create_report</em> method to use your own data set.

  Customer.create_report("csv", [row1_array, row2_array, row3_array], {:headers => headers_array})

Just pass in the format and an ordered array of rows for the data set.  You can also pass in an array of headers as :headers in the options hash.  Remember the row size and the header size need to be the same. 


==Info
  
Author: Kevin Skoglund & Matthew Bergman, Nova Fabrica, Inc.

License: Copyright 2010 by Kevin Skoglund. released under the attached MIT-LICENSE. 

GitHub: http://github.com/novafabrica/make_exportable/tree/master


==Bug Reports and Feedback

Bug reports should be submitted at https://github.com/novafabrica/make_exportable/issues

Other feedback is welcomed at info@novafabrica.com


==Warranty

This software is provided "as is" and without any express or implied warranties, including, without limitation, the implied warranties of merchantability and fitness for a particular purpose.
